docs/src/index.md, before:

```@meta
CurrentModule = NestedSamplers
```

# NestedSamplers.jl

[![GitHub](https://img.shields.io/badge/Code-GitHub-black.svg)](https://github.com/TuringLang/NestedSamplers.jl)
[![Build Status](https://github.com/turinglang/NestedSamplers.jl/workflows/CI/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/turinglang/NestedSamplers.jl/actions)
[![PkgEval](https://juliaci.github.io/NanosoldierReports/pkgeval_badges/N/NestedSamplers.svg)](https://juliaci.github.io/NanosoldierReports/pkgeval_badges/report.html)
[![Coverage](https://codecov.io/gh/turinglang/NestedSamplers.jl/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/turinglang/NestedSamplers.jl)

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.3950594.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3950594)

A Julian implementation of single- and multi-ellipsoidal nested sampling algorithms using the [AbstractMCMC](https://github.com/turinglang/abstractmcmc.jl) interface.

This package was heavily influenced by [`nestle`](https://github.com/kbarbary/nestle), [`dynesty`](https://github.com/joshspeagle/dynesty), and [`NestedSampling.jl`](https://github.com/kbarbary/NestedSampling.jl).


## Installation

To use the nested samplers first install this library

```julia
julia> ]add NestedSamplers
```

## Usage

The samplers are built using the [AbstractMCMC](https://github.com/turinglang/abstractmcmc.jl) interface. To use it, we need to create a [`NestedModel`](@ref).

```@example usage
using Random
using AbstractMCMC
AbstractMCMC.setprogress!(false)
Random.seed!(8452);
nothing # hide
```

```@example usage
using Distributions
using LinearAlgebra
using NestedSamplers
using LogExpFunctions: logaddexp

# Gaussian mixture model
σ = 0.1
μ1 = ones(2)
μ2 = -ones(2)
inv_σ = diagm(0 => fill(1 / σ^2, 2))

function logl(x)
    dx1 = x .- μ1
    dx2 = x .- μ2
    f1 = -dx1' * (inv_σ * dx1) / 2
    f2 = -dx2' * (inv_σ * dx2) / 2
    return logaddexp(f1, f2)
end
priors = [
    Uniform(-5, 5),
    Uniform(-5, 5)
]
# or equivalently
prior_transform(X) = 10 .* X .- 5
# create the model
# or model = NestedModel(logl, prior_transform)
model = NestedModel(logl, priors);
nothing # hide
```

now, we set up our sampling using [StatsBase](https://github.com/JuliaStats/StatsBase.jl).

**Important:  the state of the sampler is returned in addition to the chain by `sample`.**

```@example usage
using StatsBase: sample, Weights

# create our sampler
# 2 parameters, 1000 active points, multi-ellipsoid. See docstring
spl = Nested(2, 1000)
# by default, uses dlogz for convergence. Set the keyword args here
# currently Chains and Array are support chain_types
chain, state = sample(model, spl; dlogz=0.2, param_names=["x", "y"])
# optionally resample the chain using the weights
chain_res = sample(chain, Weights(vec(chain["weights"])), length(chain));
```

let's take a look at the resampled posteriors

```@example usage
using StatsPlots
density(chain_res)
# analytical posterior maxima
vline!([-1, 1], c=:black, ls=:dash, subplot=1)
vline!([-1, 1], c=:black, ls=:dash, subplot=2)
```
and compare our estimate of the Bayesian (log-)evidence to the analytical value
```@example usage
analytic_logz = log(4π * σ^2 / 100)
# within 2-sigma
@assert isapprox(analytic_logz, state.logz, atol=2state.logzerr)
```

## Contributing

**Primary Author:** Miles Lucas ([@mileslucas](https://github.com/mileslucas))

Contributions are always welcome! Take a look at the [issues](https://github.com/turinglang/nestedsamplers.jl/issues) for ideas of open problems! To discuss ideas or plan contributions, open a [discussion](https://github.com/TuringLang/NestedSamplers.jl/discussions).

Commit message:

add background section to home page

docs/src/index.md, after:

```@meta
CurrentModule = NestedSamplers
```

# NestedSamplers.jl

[![GitHub](https://img.shields.io/badge/Code-GitHub-black.svg)](https://github.com/TuringLang/NestedSamplers.jl)
[![Build Status](https://github.com/turinglang/NestedSamplers.jl/workflows/CI/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/turinglang/NestedSamplers.jl/actions)
[![PkgEval](https://juliaci.github.io/NanosoldierReports/pkgeval_badges/N/NestedSamplers.svg)](https://juliaci.github.io/NanosoldierReports/pkgeval_badges/report.html)
[![Coverage](https://codecov.io/gh/turinglang/NestedSamplers.jl/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/turinglang/NestedSamplers.jl)

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.3950594.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3950594)

A Julian implementation of single- and multi-ellipsoidal nested sampling algorithms using the [AbstractMCMC](https://github.com/turinglang/abstractmcmc.jl) interface.

This package was heavily influenced by [`nestle`](https://github.com/kbarbary/nestle), [`dynesty`](https://github.com/joshspeagle/dynesty), and [`NestedSampling.jl`](https://github.com/kbarbary/NestedSampling.jl).


## Installation

To use the nested samplers first install this library

```julia
julia> ]add NestedSamplers
```

## Background

For statistical background and a more in-depth introduction to nested sampling, I recommend the [dynesty documentation](https://dynesty.readthedocs.io/en/latest/overview.html). In short, nested sampling is a technique for simultaneously estimating the Bayesian evidence and the posterior distribution (according to [Bayes' theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayes%27_theorem)) from nested iso-likelihood shells. These shells allow a quadrature estimate of the integral for the Bayesian evidence, which we can use for model selection, as well as the statistical weights for the underlying "live" points, which is where we get our posterior samples from!

## Usage

The samplers are built using the [AbstractMCMC](https://github.com/turinglang/abstractmcmc.jl) interface. To use it, we need to create a [`NestedModel`](@ref).

```@example usage
using Random
using AbstractMCMC
AbstractMCMC.setprogress!(false)
Random.seed!(8452);
nothing # hide
```

```@example usage
using Distributions
using LinearAlgebra
using NestedSamplers
using LogExpFunctions: logaddexp

# Gaussian mixture model
σ = 0.1
μ1 = ones(2)
μ2 = -ones(2)
inv_σ = diagm(0 => fill(1 / σ^2, 2))

function logl(x)
    dx1 = x .- μ1
    dx2 = x .- μ2
    f1 = -dx1' * (inv_σ * dx1) / 2
    f2 = -dx2' * (inv_σ * dx2) / 2
    return logaddexp(f1, f2)
end
priors = [
    Uniform(-5, 5),
    Uniform(-5, 5)
]
# or equivalently
prior_transform(X) = 10 .* X .- 5
# create the model
# or model = NestedModel(logl, prior_transform)
model = NestedModel(logl, priors);
nothing # hide
```

now, we set up our sampling using [StatsBase](https://github.com/JuliaStats/StatsBase.jl).

**Important:  the state of the sampler is returned in addition to the chain by `sample`.**

```@example usage
using StatsBase: sample, Weights

# create our sampler
# 2 parameters, 1000 active points, multi-ellipsoid. See docstring
spl = Nested(2, 1000)
# by default, uses dlogz for convergence. Set the keyword args here
# currently Chains and Array are support chain_types
chain, state = sample(model, spl; dlogz=0.2, param_names=["x", "y"])
# optionally resample the chain using the weights
chain_res = sample(chain, Weights(vec(chain["weights"])), length(chain));
```

let's take a look at the resampled posteriors

```@example usage
using StatsPlots
density(chain_res)
# analytical posterior maxima
vline!([-1, 1], c=:black, ls=:dash, subplot=1)
vline!([-1, 1], c=:black, ls=:dash, subplot=2)
```
and compare our estimate of the Bayesian (log-)evidence to the analytical value
```@example usage
analytic_logz = log(4π * σ^2 / 100)
# within 2-sigma
@assert isapprox(analytic_logz, state.logz, atol=2state.logzerr)
```

## Contributing

**Primary Author:** Miles Lucas ([@mileslucas](https://github.com/mileslucas))

Contributions are always welcome! Take a look at the [issues](https://github.com/turinglang/nestedsamplers.jl/issues) for ideas of open problems! To discuss ideas or plan contributions, open a [discussion](https://github.com/TuringLang/NestedSamplers.jl/discussions).
